Filter selector cleanup (#403)
ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base: draft-ietf-jsonpath-base.md

an optional step value that moves the position from the start to the
end.

> Filter expressions `?<expr>` select certain children of an object or array, as in:

Reviewer: Why not use `logical-expr` instead and elsewhere?
```suggestion
Filter expressions `?<logical-expr>` select certain children of an object or array, as in:
```

Author: I liked the reduced weight, but went with the suggestion (throughout) in 58e7ed0

### Filter selector {#filter-selector}

Filter selectors are used to iterate over the elements or members of
structured values, i.e., JSON arrays and objects.
The structured values are identified in the nodelist offered by the
child or descendant segment the filter selector is used in.

For each iteration (element/member), a logical expression is
evaluated, the *filter expression*, which decides whether the node of
the element/member is selected.
(While a logical expression evaluates to what mathematically is a

> Boolean value, we use the term *logical* to maintain a distinction from

Author: Passive is really bad here.
Fixed in b18e22e

of each array element or value in an object member of the structured value being
filtered; this element or member value is then known as the *current node*.

The current node can be used as the start of one or more JSONPath
queries used inside subexpressions of the filter expression, notated
via the current-node-identifier `@`.
Each JSONPath query can be used either for testing existence of a
result of the query, for obtaining a specific JSON value resulting
from that query that can then be used in a comparison, or as a
*function argument*.

Within the logical expression for a filter selector, function
expressions can be used to operate on nodelists and values.
The set of available functions is extensible, with a number of
functions predefined, see {{fnex}}, and the ability to register further
functions in the Function Extensions sub-registry ({{iana-fnex}}).
When a function is defined, it is given a unique name, and the
*declared type*
of each of its arguments as well as the declared type returned from the
function is declared.
The type system is limited in scope; its function is to express
restrictions that, without functions, are implicit in the grammar of

> filter expressions.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this case can be added to the [conversion section](https://github.com/ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base/pull/403/files#diff-aca3bb236d11f768483f8a1153cb9030b67d9cd6a39f012e8e4bfec2c6275165R1538) as another "gotcha" example.

While I agree that it's surprising, the spec doesn't claim to have a way to compare nodelists, and I think, once thought through, a result of `true` for your example can be expected.

> filter expressions.

Author: I'm actually leaning in the inverse direction: getting rid of "singular types" in the grammar.
But it would be good to have a proposal for going in the direction you suggest.
Not in this PR, though...

> filter expressions.

Reviewer 2: To be clear, what do you mean by "singular types?"

> filter expressions.

Author: `singular-path` as a feeble duplication of `filter-path`.
(We also need to fix the suffix "path" in these things.  Later...)

The type system also guides conversions ({{type-conv}}) that are

> implicit in the grammar without the use of function expressions.

Reviewer 2: Sure it does.  `@.a == 42` contains an implicit conversion from the singular nodelist returned by `@.a` to the value that the single node contains.  `NodesType` -> `ValueType`.

Without this implicit conversion, you have to define what `==` means for

- nodelist == nodelist
- nodelist == value
- value == value

But with the conversion, you only need to define "value == value."

#### Syntax
{: unnumbered}

The filter selector has the form `?<expr>`.

~~~~ abnf
filter-selector     = "?" S logical-expr
~~~~

> As the filter expression is composed of side-effect free components,

Author: More global attempt at reducing the use of "component" in f7ea77d

basic-expr          = paren-expr /
                      comparison-expr /
                      test-expr

paren-expr          = [logical-not-op S] "(" S logical-expr S ")"
                                        ; parenthesized expression
logical-not-op      = "!"               ; logical NOT operator
~~~~

> A test expression is shorthand for a comparison that

Author: Fixed in f111cff

either tests the existence of a node
designated by an embedded query (see {{extest}}) or tests the
result of a function expression (see {{fnex}}).
In the latter case, if the function result type is declared as
`LogicalType` (see {{typesys}}), it tests whether the result
is `LogicalTrue`; if the function result type is declared as
`NodesType`, it tests whether the result is non-empty.
If the declared function result type is `ValueType`, its use in a
test expression is not well-typed.

~~~ abnf

test-expr           = [logical-not-op S]
                      (filter-path / ; path existence or non-existence
                       function-expr) ; LogicalType or
                                      ; NodesType
filter-path         = rel-path / json-path
rel-path            = current-node-identifier segments
current-node-identifier = "@"
~~~~

Comparison expressions are available for comparisons between primitive
values (that is, numbers, strings, `true`, `false`, and `null`).
These can be obtained via literal values; Singular Paths, each of
which selects at most one node the value of which is then used; and
function expressions (see {{fnex}}) of type `ValueType` or

> `NodesType` (see {{type-conv}}).

Reviewer 2: I disagree.  The grammar (I assume you mean the ABNF exclusively) is augmented by the type system.  The type system provides additional "well-formedness" checks that haven't been (or can't be) expressed in the ABNF.

I see them as each defining a set of restrictions, and the set of valid expressions lies in the union of those restrictions.

> `NodesType` (see {{type-conv}}).

Author: This is an interesting discussion, but I think no action is needed here in this PR.

##### Existence Tests {#extest}
{: unnumbered}

> A path by itself in a Logical context is an existence test which yields true if the path selects at least one node and yields false if the path does not select any nodes.

Reviewer 2: As I described in https://github.com/ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base/pull/402#discussion_r1113518922, this requires that you describe the conversion without calling it a "conversion."

> A path by itself in a Logical context is an existence test which yields true if the path selects at least one node and yields false if the path does not select any nodes.

Author: No action needed, I think?

(see {{synsem-overview}}).
To define which function expressions are well-typed,
a type system is first introduced.

### Type System for Function Expressions {#typesys}

Each parameter and the result of a function extension must have a declared type.

A type is a set of instances.
Declared types enable checking a JSONPath query for well-typedness
independent of any argument the JSONPath query is applied to.

{{tbl-types}} defines the available types in terms of abstract instances, where `n` denotes a node, `v` denotes a value, and `nl` denotes
a nodelist.

| Type                 | Abstract Instances                       |
| :--                  | :----------------                        |
| `ValueType`          | `Value(v)`, `Nothing`                    |
| `LogicalType`        | `LogicalTrue`, `LogicalFalse`            |
| `NodesType`       | `Nodes(nl)`                              |
{: #tbl-types title="Function extension type system"}

Notes:

* `ValueType` is an abstraction of a JSON value or `Nothing`.
* `LogicalType` is an abstraction of the result of a `logical-expr`.
  Its two instances, `LogicalTrue` and `LogicalFalse`, are not related to

>   the JSON literals `true` and `false` and have no syntactical representation in JSONPath.

Reviewer: Post-merge query:

@cabo I'm trying to understand the intent behind the statement "and have no syntactical representation in JSONPath". Why aren't `1 == 1` and `1 == 0` valid representations of `LogicalTrue` and `LogicalFalse`?

Author: They semantically yield LT/LF, but aren't syntactical representations.

Add "direct" if that wording isn't sharp enough.

Reviewer: https://github.com/ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base/pull/413

* `NodesType` is an abstraction of a `filter-path` (which appears
  in a test expression or as a function argument).

>   Members of `NodesType` have no syntactical representation in JSONPath.

Reviewer: Post-merge query:

@cabo Similarly, why isn't a query that always returns an empty nodelist (e.g. `$[?1 == 0]`) a valid syntactical representation of `Nothing` (a member of `NodesType` )?

Author: https://github.com/ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base/pull/403#discussion_r1122634114

Reviewer: https://github.com/ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base/pull/413

or a `comparable`.

Any function expressions in a query must be well-formed (by conforming to the above ABNF)
and well-typed,
otherwise the JSONPath implementation MUST raise an error
(see {{synsem-overview}}).
To define which function expressions are well-typed,
a type system is first introduced.

### Type System for Function Expressions {#typesys}

Each argument and result of a function extension must have a declared type.

A type is a set of instances.
Declared types enable testing a JSONPath query for well-typedness
independent of any argument the JSONPath query is applied to.

{{tbl-types}} defines the available types in terms of abstract instances, where `n` denotes a node, `v` denotes a value, and `nl` denotes
a non-empty nodelist.

| Type                 | Abstract Instances                       |
| :--                  | :----------------                        |

> | `ValueType`          | `Value(v)`, `Nothing`                    |

Reviewer: I prefer `OptionalValueType` as this gives a hint of the possibility of the value `Nothing`.

Reviewer 2: I tend to not get hung up on naming, and while I don't fully disagree with you, I think `ValueType` is considerably less clunky than `OptionalValueType`.  `ValueType` being defined here in this way is sufficient for me.

| `OptionalValueType`       | `Value(v)`, `Nothing`                    | `OptionalNodeType`, `ValueType`, `OptionalBooleanType` |
| `ValueType`               | `Value(v)`                               | `BooleanType`                                  |
| `OptionalBooleanType`     | `Value(true)`, `Value(false)`, `Nothing` | `BooleanType`                                  |
| `BooleanType`             | `Value(true)`, `Value(false)`            |                                                |
| `OptionalNodesType`       | `Nodes(nl)`, `Nothing`                   | `OptionalNodeType`                             |
a non-empty nodelist.

| Type                 | Abstract Instances                       |
| :--                  | :----------------                        |
| `ValueType`          | `Value(v)`, `Nothing`                    |
| `LogicalType`        | `LogicalTrue`, `LogicalFalse`            |
| `NodesType`       | `Nodes(nl)`                              |
{: #tbl-types title="Function extension type system"}

Notes:

* `OptionalNodeOrValueType` is an abstraction of a `comparable` (which may appear on either side of a comparison or as a function argument).

> * `OptionalNodeType` is an abstraction of a Singular Path.

Reviewer: This may still be needed as an analog of Singular Path in comparisons.

> * `ValueType` is an abstraction of a primitive value.

Reviewer: We may actually still need this type. For example, `count()` never returns `Nothing`, so the return type doesn't accurately describe the possible return values.

> * `LogicalType` is an abstraction of a the result of a `test-expr`.

Reviewer 2: This suggestion works if you define the "value of a `logical-expr`" to be its result, but I don't think we've done that.  I'd also prefer to leave "value" out of the logical context, to be honest.

>   Its `LogicalTrue` and `LogicalFalse` values are not relatable to

Reviewer 2: No, relatable is correct, but they cannot "be related" (verb).

* Where an expression with a declared type of `NodesType` needs to be
  converted to a `ValueType`, the conversion proceeds as follows:
  * If the nodelist contains a single node, the conversion result is
    the value of the node.
  * If the nodelist is empty or contains multiple nodes, the
    conversion result is `Nothing`.
* Where a member of `NodesType` needs to be converted to a
  `LogicalType`, the conversion proceeds as follows:
  * If the nodelist contains one or more nodes, the conversion result
    is `LogicalTrue`.
  * If the nodelist is empty, the conversion result is `LogicalFalse`.

The well-typedness of function expressions can now be defined in terms of this type system.

### Well-Typedness of Function Expressions

A function expression is well-typed if all of the following are true:

* If it occurs directly in a test expression, the function is declared
  to have a result type of `LogicalType`, or (conversion applies)
  `NodesType`.
* If it occurs directly as a `comparable` in a comparison, the
  function is declared to have a result type of `ValueType`, or

>   (conversion applies) `NodesType`.

Reviewer 2: If you want to do this, you'd have to define a new type for single-nodelists (separate from `NodesType`) so that functions can specify that this is what they return and can be used in comparisons.  While you could then restrict `NodesType` functions to only appearing in test expressions, I'm not convinced this new type is any more useful than the function just returning the value that the node contains (`ValueType`).

* Otherwise, it is occurring as an argument to a further function
  expression, and the following rules for function arguments apply to
  its declared result type.
* Each argument of the function can be used for the declared type of the corresponding declared
  parameter according to one of the following rules:
   * The argument is a function expression with declared result type that is the same as the declared type of the parameter.
   * The argument is a literal primitive value and the defined type of the parameter is `ValueType`.
   * The argument is a Singular Path or `filter-path` (which includes
     Singular Paths), or a function expression with declared result
     type `NodesType`.  Where the declared type of the parameter is

>      not `NodeType`, a conversion applies.

Reviewer 2: I agree with the correction, but I don't see any use of a `NodeType`.  The only places we deal with a single node are in defining `@` and converting a single nodelist into a value.  Neither of these cases warrant a type being defined for them.

$[?length(@.authors) >= 5]
~~~

Its only argument is an instance of `ValueType` (possibly taken from a

> singular path as in the example above).  The result also is an

Reviewer: We also have to allow the argument to be a function expression, in which case it should be an analog of a Singular Path like `OptionalNodeOrValueType`.

Reviewer 2: The only kind of function that is valid here would be one that returns `ValueType`.  "An instance of `ValueType`" includes this.

The result of a Singular Path is also convertible to `ValueType`, so no issues there.

### `count` Function Extension {#count}

Arguments:
: 1. `NodesType`

Result:

> : `ValueType` (unsigned integer)

Reviewer: We should probably use a type which doesn't include `Nothing`. Failing that, the spec for this function should make it clear that `Nothing` is never returned.

Reviewer 2: "(unsigned integer)" as compared with `length()`'s "(unsigned integer or `Nothing`)" makes that clear, I think.

$[?match(@.date, "1974-05-..")]
~~~

> Its arguments are instances of ValueType.

Reviewer: We should mention that a Singular Path is also acceptable as the first argument.

Reviewer 2: Again, I think "instances of `ValueType` includes these.

> Its arguments are instances of ValueType.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Its arguments are instances of `ValueType`.
```

$[?search(@.author, "[BR]ob")]
~~~

> Its arguments are instances of ValueType.

Reviewer: We should mention that a Singular Path is also acceptable as the first argument.

> Its arguments are instances of ValueType.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Its arguments are instances of `ValueType`.
```

If the first argument is not a string or the second argument is not a
string conforming to {{-iregexp}}, the result is `LogicalFalse`. <!-- XXX -->
Otherwise, the string that is the first argument is searched for at
least one substring that matches the iregexp contained in the string

> that is the second argument; the result is `LogicalTrue` if

Reviewer: The above sentence was truncated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that is the second argument; the result is `LogicalTrue` if
 the string contains a match the iregexp and `LogicalFalse` otherwise.
```

(referenced from `match()` definition)

Author: Fixed in 3e1265a

### Examples
{: unnumbered}

| Query | Comment |
| :---: | ------- |
| `$[?length(@) < 3]` | well-typed |
| `$[?length(@.*) < 3]` | not well-typed since `@.*` is a non-singular path |
| `$[?count(@.*) == 1]` | well-typed |
| `$[?count(1) == 1]` | not well-typed since `1` is not a path  |
| `$[?count(foo(@.*)) == 1]` | well-typed, where `foo` is a function extension with argument of type `NodesType` and result type `NodesType` |
| `$[?match(@.timezone, 'Europe/.*')]`         | well-typed |

> | `$[?match(@.timezone, 'Europe/.*') == true]` | not well-typed as JSONPath logicals and JSON booleans do not mix |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `$[?match(@.timezone, 'Europe/.*') == true]` | invalid as JSONPath logicals are not well-typed in comparisons |
```

Author: I tried to be a bit informal in this example...
(And I certainly don't want to regress from "well-typed" to "invalid" (which has been rooted out, not the least as it can be considered a non-word these days.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `$[?match(@.timezone, 'Europe/.*') == true]` | not well-typed as JSONPath logicals may not be used in comparisons |
```

Brief description:
: a brief description

Parameters:

> : A comma-separated list of zero or more declared types, each for one of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: A comma-separated list of zero or more declared types, one for each of the
```

The array slicing construct `[start:end:step]` is unique to JSONPath,
inspired by {{SLICE}} from ECMASCRIPT 4.

> Filter expressions are supported via the syntax `?<expr>` as in

Reviewer 2: This would need the same treatment as https://github.com/ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base/pull/403/files#r1113477827 if we decide to do that.

Author: I don't understand what you mean by "do that" (and the line has already changed into ?<logical-expr>)...

Reviewer 2: "do that" == "follow Glyn's suggestion," which you did, and you changed it here, too.  This is resolved.
